There is a lot of really rich information
in the Jacobian matrix and we can use it as
a sort of diagnostic tool to work at how well the robot can move at a particular joint angle configuration.
Let us look in more detail at the case where
the Jacobian matrix is singular and this is
what the Jacobian matrix looks like for a
robot in the pose shown here, where joint
angle five is equal to zero. The motion of
the end-effector due to joint four is given
by this column of the Jacobian matrix and
the motion of the end-effector due to joint
six is given by this column of the Jacobian
matrix.
You will notice that these two columns are
identical and that means that they result
in the same end-effector motion and in this
particular case it is rotation about the world
Z axis. We can get the same motion by changing
joint four or by changing joint six.
For a square matrix, if two columns are identical,
then it becomes singular; and a mathematician
would say that the rank of the matrix has
reduced from full rank, rank six, to a rank of five.
Here is that same Jacobian matrix in MATLAB
and we can clearly see that columns four and
column six are identical. If we compute the
determinate of the matrix, we see that it
is equal to zero; it means that this Jacobian
is singular. If I compute the rank of this
matrix, it is equal to five and that’s saying
that there are only five unique columns in
this matrix. Two of the columns are identically
equal.
Let us look now at a more healthy Jacobian
matrix. We are going to compute the Jacobian
for the set joint angle Qn. This matrix has
no obvious duplicated columns. Its determinant
is not equal to zero and its rank is equal
to six. That means that all six columns are unique.
In the last lecture, we introduced the concept
of the velocity ellipse and we did this in
two dimensions. For a set of joint angles
which lie on a circle in the plane of all
possible joint angle velocities, we mapped
that into an ellipse in the space of all possible
end-effector velocities and that indicated
that in a particular robot joint angle configuration,
the robot was able to move more quickly in
the world Y direction than it could move in
the world X direction. We can do the same
thing for a six-axis robot, but the mathematics
is a little bit more complex.
We have this relationship between the robot
end-effector spatial velocity and the joint
angle velocity. I can combine these two equations
and come up with this expression which is
the equation for a hyper-ellipsoid or some
ellipse in six dimensions; so it is a little
hard to get your head around. Mostly, we
are interested in the first three elements
of the spatial velocity; that is the translational
velocity of the robot end-effector.
In this case, we end up with a three-dimensional
ellipsoid which we can quite easily plot. So,
here is the velocity ellipsoid for a robot
in a particular configuration. We could view
this ellipsoid from different angles and we
could see that the ellipse is quite elongated
in the vertical direction and it is reasonably
flat in the direction towards the base of
the robot and so the robot is able to move
most quickly in the direction of the long
axis of the ellipse and it moves much more
slowly in the direction of the short axis
of this ellipsoid.
If the ellipsoid was actually a sphere, then
we say the motion is isotropic; that means
that the robot end-effector is able to move
equally quickly in any direction. It is convenient
to introduce a notion of manipulability, a difficult
word to say, and it is a simple scalar measure
that says something about the shape of the
velocity ellipsoid. If manipulability is equal
to one, then we have the case of isotropic
motion; the robot is able to move equally
fast in any direction.
If manipulability is equal to zero, then the
ellipsoid is collapsed and it becomes just
an elliptical plate and it means that motion
in one Cartesian direction is not possible
at all. In general, the manipulability will
be somewhere between zero and one. If it is
close to one, it means that the robot is configured
to move quite quickly in any direction in its workspace.
As the manipulability gets closer to zero,
it means that the robot is in an awkward pose
and there are some directions where it was
not able to move very quickly at all. Manipulability
is a strong function of the robot joint angles,
so depending on the task, you may need to
set the robot joint angles so that it has got the speed required in order to achieve that particular task.
We are going to use MATLAB to display one
of these velocity ellipsoids. The first thing
I am going to do is to plot the robot in the
joint angle configuration that is in the middle
of its work-space and that is what the robot
looks like and then I am going to use the
method for ellipse to overlay on that a velocity
ellipsoid.
This method has got quite a number of arguments
and options. First of all, I pass in the joint
angles that I am interested in. I want the
ellipse to be plotted in the colour blue and
I want the edge lines on the ellipse to be
in white. I want the whole thing to
be somewhat translucent, so I am going to
give it an alpha value of 0.5 and there we
see the velocity ellipse.
Now, I can rotate this around and look at
it from all sorts of different orientations
and viewpoints. If I look at it pretty much
side on, we can see that the ellipse is relatively
thin in the direction toward the base of the
robot. That is the direction where the robot
is not able to move very quickly or as in
the vertical Z direction, basically up and
down, the robot is able to move quite quickly;
so that is the velocity ellipsoid for this
joint angle configuration.
If I choose a different joint angle configuration,
this is where the robot arm is stretched right
out horizontally which is the joint angle
vector, Qs, in my workspace then the robot
is in that configuration and now I am going
to plot the ellipse for this particular configuration,
so I would just come back and edit this command,
change Qn to Qs, and here we have the velocity
ellipsoid for this particular case.
Now, we can see that it is an ellipse; but
side on, it has got no thickness at all, it
is a plate. So, in this particular joint angle
configuration, the robot is able to move its
end-effector from this particular view up
and down and left and right; but looking it
at this way, it has got no ability at all
to move the end-effector back towards the base.